Welcome back. This is lecture A8 of
disco thinking 2026. Uh I'd like to have
a kind of split lecture today. Uh first
half of it is to introduce you to mark
of chain Monte Carlo. Um this will be a
non-technical introduction aimed at uh
giving you a way to use mark of chain
Monte Carlo in your workflows. Uh and
and that means focusing on diagnostics,
right? Because like with many of these
uh math libraries that magic away the
comput computations for you, you still
have to supervise them as they can go
wrong. And so teaching you about the
diagnostics, how that fits into the
workflow is my priority here. Um if you
want more technical information about
the algorithms themselves, there's the
book. The book has uh more technical
information and then there's there's
endless stuff about Marov chains out
there on the technical side. And then
the second half of this I'd like to
apply using markup of shade Monte Carlo
um to do basian updating to a very
important family of models called item
response or item response theory uh
which is a kind of factor model that has
a lots of broad applications and also
expand your horizons in thinking about
parametric models. Um okay so uh
simulation ways uh randomization ways to
do numerical calculations are old.
Here's a reenactment at Bristol. They
throw hot dogs on the ground um to
estimate pi.
This works. You do these tape lines, you
throw the hot dogs, and every time a hot
dog crosses a line, you score it
crossing. And the ratio of crosses over
total sausages tossed is approximately
pi over two.
This works for almost magical reasons,
but it's because hot dogs spin in a
circle. That's why it's related to pi.
It's it's a cool thing. You can look
this up. U algorithms like this are old.
Uh Greeks had them. I mean this is not
you know ancient Greeks, contemporary
Greeks obviously have them [laughter]
but and so this this kind of idea of
using randomness to do numerical
calculations is is ancient and we use
this all the time now. But the idea of
using random numbers is entrenched in
your lives. I've have you do
simulations. Uh but this is a bit uh of
a modern move to be to use a bunch of
numerical integration techniques that
are premised on random numbers. Um
starting in the uh early 20th century PE
statisticians started publishing books
full of pages like this right because
you needed you didn't have a computer to
generate random numbers and so you'd
like pick a random page and a random row
and then you get a random number there.
These things are now just curiosities in
libraries, right? But uh this must seem
like madness to somebody from, you know,
2000 BC. Like why would you publish a
book of random numbers? But it turns out
there's scientific justification for
this. We use random numbers to do
difficult calculations. Now um in the
context of our core basian workflow
we're interested in using a family of
techniques called markup chain mane
carlo which are more and less random
that depending upon the algorithm you
use and it's a technique for doing
numerical integration which means in
this context getting the posterior
distribution there's a distribution
there we'd like to sample from it we
can't define it analytically we we draw
random samples from it seems like
madness but it works and there's a
tremendous amount of contemporary bioats
which uses markup chain Monte Carlo
because it's the most robust method
there are lots of ways to do basian
updating though get posterior
distributions in simple cases there are
exact solutions I think there was
exactly one example of this in this
course in the very beginning with a beta
binomial model um the globe tossing
there's the globe on the table still you
can solve that one analytically as
possible the integral is known yeah um
slightly more complicated ones you can
also do the integrals if everything's
Gaussian you can often do integrals by
you I mean the computer but you can get
analytical solutions for them. Um
there's grid approximation which is a
numerical technique which just does not
scale very well. There's nothing wrong
with it. It's just as soon as you have
more than a few dozen parameters it the
combinotaurics are awful for it. Um
there's quadratic approximation which
we've been using a lot. Uh it's a very
robust useful method. There's a version
of it that's non-basian as well. there's
nothing exclusively basian about it. Um
uh it also does does not scale well uh
in various ways and so we need other
algorithms. Um and these days that means
things based upon gradients uh that
includes like variational approximations
and marov chain Monte Carlo. Um so what
are marov chains? Markov chains are
named after this guy Andre Andreovich
Marov.
um and uh who's he's a very accomplished
mathematician
and we say a markoff chain chain means a
sequence of draws from some target
distribution. Uh in a markoff chain the
history doesn't matter for where you go
next. It's just where you are now that
matters. Yeah, it says it's memoryless.
That's when someone says they're they're
working on a Markoff chain, it's a
memoryless process. And that's true also
in in markup chains we're going to use.
It's just the current position that
determines where the chain goes next.
Doesn't matter where it was 10 steps
ago. That's memoryless in that regard.
Uh turns out you can model almost all of
nature as a memoryless process using
marov chains, right? Because only the
present matters. It's like if you think
about physics for a moment, that's not
such a strange assumption. Yeah. What
happens next only depends upon now,
right? Where you are now depends upon
history. But but if you know where you
are now, you've conditioned on the
history. That's the the idea how markoff
chains work. Um, Monte Carlo is a a
funny term for random simulation in the
apply in applied mathematics. Uh, people
disagree about where this came from, but
I think the first appearance is in a
paper by um, Stannis Ulam uh, and where
he calls it, this is a playful thing,
calls it the Monte Carlo method. He's I
think there's a slide about about Ulam
later. Uh, Monte Carlo is obviously a
place where people gamble. So I think
this was the right this is the idea. Um
so we use markoff chains a lot these
days because they allow us to sample
from highdimensional distributions with
arbitrary constraints. They don't have
to be Gaussian. They can have any shape
you like. Uh and uh we can as scientists
we want to focus on what I call bespoke
models. models which are tailored
uniquely to our scientific process and
not worry about massaging the
distributional assumptions or constraint
assumptions so that it's numerically
tractable, right? We'd like to focus on
that and so these computational methods
which um are more robust and can handle
more arbitrary distributions are really
nice for freeing your scientific
imagination. uh this literature really
gets going with this paper in 1953 the
Metropolis at all paper Metropolis
Rosenth Rosen Booth Teller and Teller
it's an interesting list of
um these folks were working on fusion
bombs they were simulating uh fus
nuclear explosions um to design ever
more effective death weapons that's the
beginning of of mark of chain Monte
Carlo uh taking off and this paper is
has been cited a a lot uh cited by
47,000 whenever I took this screenshot.
Certainly more now. It's probably a
thousand every day. Just write something
like that. Um almost no one uses this
method anymore, but it's kind of the
grandfather of of these methods. Uh the
person who did the programming work, the
the lead author, Metropolis, did nothing
on this paper. And it's this is the
method in the paper is called the
Metropolis algorithm.
Metropolis did nothing on this paper.
The person who did the programming is
Ariana Rosenluth who's the second
author. Uh Ariana Rosenluth was also an
Olympic class fencer.
Here's I just throw this in for human
interest. This is Ariana Rosenbleuth.
She programmed the computer. Um what
program did she com uh this was also
back I did I did fencing in college so
I'm a big fan of fencing. And uh uh this
was back when men and women did not
compete separately because it makes no
difference in fencing. I don't know why
they sex segregated. It's totally just
like one of those sports where it makes
no sense, right? The sword is the same.
[snorts]
Absolutely the same. And um uh what did
what did she program? She programmed
this thing. This is a little bit more
challenging. Input was done by flipping
switches uh and entering it onto
magnetic tape. They used a bicycle wheel
to spin the magnetic tape and feed it
into the machine. It's just like really
custom garage level sorts of programming
back then. You you know how good you
have it now, right? With your VS Code
and your R studio, [laughter] right?
This is this was different. Um this is
the computer they used. It was called
Maniac Mathematical Analyzer numerical
integrator and computer. They worked
real hard on that acronym. Um it's a,000
pounds. Had 5 kilobytes of memory.
uh and could do 70,000 multiplications
per second, which might sound fast, but
your laptop if it's crappy, um weighs 4
to 7 pounds, has uh more than 8 million
kilobytes of memory and can do billions
of multiplications per second. Your
phone can do that, too, right? It just
weighs less. Yeah. So, this was a real
struggle. Um uh it is you're lucky to be
alive when you are. Uh Marco Monte Carlo
is a lot more diverse now. Almost no one
uses uh the original metropolis
algorithm. Um but it was a necessary
step in developing later things. Today I
want to mainly focus on the method uh
that is in broadest use today which is
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo and flavors of
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. So I want to
tell you what that means. Um Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo uses gradients uh uh to make
make this the the random part more
efficient. I'll explain what that means.
Um, so here's the the basic I'm going to
call this the Rosen Bluth algorithm.
This is what you'll normally every place
else in the world this will be called
the Metropolis algorithm, but I'm going
to try to make make fetch happen here
and get people to call it the Rosen
Bluth algorithm. If you ever write about
this, please call it the Rosen Bluth
algorithm, then cite the Metropolis
paper, right? I don't know if we can do
this, but we got to try, right? Change
starts with you. Yeah. Okay. Uh, so the
Rosen Bluth algorithm. Um what happens
is you're so we're looking we're looking
into the posterior distribution which we
can't see remember that's why we're
using this algorithm but this is a case
I'm just illustrating it for you and it
looks like a bowl because this is the
the log probability space. So if you've
got a Gaussian hill and you take the
logarithm of it becomes a par a parabola
bowl a parabolic bowl. Yeah because
that's what a Gaussian distribution is.
It's just a parabola that's been
exponentiated. Um, and so now we want to
take more we want to take random samples
from that distribution and we want more
samples down at the bottom because those
are higher probability points, right?
But we want to sample all over because
we want the whole distribution. Okay,
that's our goal because we're drawing
samples from the posterior distribution.
So here's a two-dimensional distribution
and we're going to take uh the way these
algorithms work is they start somewhere
at some coordination in the parameter
space and they propose a jump to a new
location and they evaluate the relative
probabilities of the current place
they're at and the place they're going
to. Um and if if the place they're going
to has higher probability then they'll
always move. If it has lower probability
they move some proportion of the time.
That's the way the metropolis algorithm
works. There's a lot more detail about
this in the book uh and some code you
can play with. I'm just going to animate
it for you now. Show you what happens.
So, we're at a place and it makes
proposals. The reds are rejected
proposals and every time it accepts it
moves. So, it's like some weird
caterpillar. Yeah. And all of those
points that are left behind are samples
that are returned from the posterior
distribution. And you run this long
enough and uh the samples approximate
the distribution to whatever level of
accuracy you like. You just keep it
running until you're satisfied.
Cool. Yeah. Yes. So on your computer,
this would run really fast. I've
obviously slowed this down tremendously
for the animation, but it runs much
faster than this. Um,
and basic problem with the Metropolis
algorithm and everything that's based
upon it, uh, well, not everything. I
mean, Hamiltonian is also based upon
this, but is that it rejects a lot of
proposals. You'll see there's lots of
these the groping around here and the
red points where there are rejections
and it doesn't move. That's just wasted
computer cycles, right? What you'd
really like is to accept every proposal
if you could make smart proposals, but
the proposals are random in the
Metropolis algorithm, and that's part of
the problem. Uh there are ways to tune
the algorithm to make it a little more
efficient. The basic trade-off is the
step size. That is how far away the
proposals are um from your current
position. With a large step size, you're
going to reject more proposals because
you're going to get proposals in bad
places that are in the tails of the
distribution and they'll be rejected. um
uh but when they're accepted, you
explore the distribution faster. So on
the left, we're moving fast, but we're
rejecting a lot of proposals. On the
right, you're accepting most of the
proposals because they're close to where
you currently are. So if you've if
you're at a position, it's someplace in
the target distribution. So proposals
near it are also going to be good, but
you're exploring the posterior
distribution really slowly. Yeah. And
it's going to take longer. And this
basic trade-off cannot be solved. Right
now both of these both the left and the
right will eventually give you a good
estimate. Um but you just might have to
wait a while. So I had mentioned before
if we have a Gaussian distribution like
this one and we take the log of it we
get a bowl. Yeah. So should have put
this slide a little earlier. Apologies
but let me draw it with my hands for the
people in the audience. Um in two
dimensions you get more interesting
shapes. Yeah. You get multi-dimensional
bowls. Um so in a two-dimensional
Gaussian you take the log of it you get
a two-dimensional parabolic surface like
this. Um I want to ex our goal now for
better proposals is to exploit the
curvature of this bowl and that's what
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo does. So I want
to extend this now to skateboarding. If
you're at a skate park, right? You can
roll around in what's called a big bowl.
Yeah. And the gravity does the work for
you here. You explore this distribution
just by pushing off the side. I know the
the analogy is a little weird, but it's
not so bad actually because Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo literally runs a physics
simulation of a frictionless particle
rolling around in a bowl and we take uh
positions of the position of the skater
so to speak and those are the samples
from the distribution. So it's not
actually an inaccurate we're really
going to run physics simulations. Um so
the bottom is the high probability part
of the posterior distribution. The edge
is a low probability part. So we want
the the skater to spend more time at the
bottom and they will as they do
trajectories through the big bowl. Um
but we have to do this in a very
balanced way. Now for for um easy nice
big bowls like this one metropolis would
work fine too. This is not a difficult
distribution to sample from. Um but you
can have arbitrarily complicated uh
posterior distributions with all kinds
of weird curvature. So now I have a film
of Tony Hawk to show you which has more
arbitrary curvature. So some of you
hopefully someone knows who Tony Hawk
is. Yeah. Um so uh posterior
distribution does all kinds of weird
local curvature. We want to sample from
them accurately. So you you you want an
algorithm that's like Tony Hawk. It can
do nonsense like this, right? Just so we
have that and it's called Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo. Yes. Okay. I know you want
to watch this again, but see it there.
Very good. Um, so Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo literally rolls around in the
bowl. We we take our current position.
There's a frictionless particle and
we're going to flick it in a random
direction with a random velocity. And
then we're just going to simulate it
moving around uh on the curvature. This
is why we need gradients because
gradients give us the curvature, the
local curvature of the position we're in
in the distribution. So that means
derivatives of the log probability.
That's how we get gradients. Um, you
don't have to calculate these yourself,
as I'll I'll say in a few slides,
because we have math libraries that do
this for us now. In the 90s, you had to
do it yourself. It was a dark time. But,
uh, now there are math libraries that
just do autodiff for you. So, I'm going
to animate this. Now, this is what
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo looks like
exploring the same distribution. Um,
the code to produce these animations is
in the scripts folder, by the way. I'm
just running the Hamiltonian simulation
here on this arbitrary surface. At the
end of each trajectory, we we run for a
preset number of steps in the
simulation. And then um at the end of
that trajectory, we take a sample. And
you'll notice that uh the samples are
are always or nearly always accepted in
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. Why? Because
they're good proposals. Because they're
because you're following the gradient of
the surface. You don't make dumb
proposals outside the skate bowl. Yeah.
Which is what Metropolis does. Does that
make sense? Isn't this cool? I think
it's cool. Um, again, in your computer,
this goes real fast because these
trajectories are simulated very quickly
and you do a number in parallel, but um,
I've slowed it down to make it more
interesting. So,
um, you do have to, uh, there is tuning
to be done of step length because you
can run these trajectories forever,
right? It's frictionless, so it'll never
stop.
It'll just keep going forever. Um, and
if you have long trajectories like on
the left, uh, one of the things you have
to watch out for is that you might just
loop back to where you started. So
you're not exploring the distribution
very well. You don't want to loop back
to where you started. You see that's
what's happening. Well, I've rigged the
left so it looks like so it loops back
to where it starts. Yeah. And then you
don't get samples on the other side. And
on the right, the trajectories are
really short. Um, uh, so it just takes
too long to explore the the
distribution. There's some intermediate
step length which is usually optimal. Uh
both of these will work though. It's
just about tuning it to make it more
efficient. Um these days the software
does this tuning automatically right in
this phase called warm-up which I'll
talk about in a bit. Um and and the
algorithms we actually use are not basic
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo like this but
they're ones that uh like the no U-turn
sampler which is avoiding the looping
back to where it started. it has a
intelligent tree process to make
decisions about when it should when it
should truncate a trajectory. Uh this is
nice because if you have um
distributions which are not nice
Gaussian bowls which have more
constrained dimensions of some kind then
you want to follow the curvature and
Hamiltonian does that no problem. Right?
So in a space like this uh which is an
ellipse you roll the skater around in
the middle and it follows the high
probability region really nicely.
Whereas Metropolis would jump into no
man's land here because it would it
would make proposals outside of this
narrow band where the high probability
is. Does that make sense? So this is why
it's uh everybody uses gradients now for
this reason um and other reasons. Yeah.
Question
>> I wonder about those
distributions. Where do they come from?
What are those? I still understand the
concept of them.
>> Normally when we try to run a model to
answer some question, right, we get
some.
>> Yes.
And like
some kind of
normal distribution.
um you get it right away in hierarchical
models. Any kind of hierarchical model,
you're stacking parameters on parameters
and then you can get a lot of curvature
uh really extreme curvature. And uh
there's an example in the book called
the funnel problem which is an example
of this. But basically the most ordinary
cause of these problems are scale
parameters, things like variances uh
which have hard constraints at zero and
as they change they change the shape of
everything else. uh and that's where
these sorts of scaling problems tend to
arise and they're they're routine and
highdimensional computing now. So
ordinary mixed effects models have this
problem for example all the time if you
just stick with flat multiple
regressions you can pretend everything's
Gaussian absolutely but there there are
a lot of problems which just aren't like
that anymore. Yeah. Also as soon as you
get to nonlinear outcome spaces you can
get curvature like this too ordered
categories and and other things like
that. Yeah. Um,
neural networks have a ton of really
extreme curvature as well. So, but
they're versions of hierarchical models.
So, you think about like large language
models or anything of that type. Um,
adversarial networks. You're stacking
layers upon layers of parameters
and they call them neurons sometimes,
but they're just parameters. They're not
neurons. And uh that creates effects
like this too because now um if anything
below a parameter changes it changes the
shape of that parameter's distribution
and so you can get lots of complicated
effects and uh so yeah large language
models are trained with gradientbased
methods as well. Um they use stochastic
gradient descent for the most part but
it's not Hamiltonian Monte Carlo but it
also uses gradients. Yeah for the same
reason. Okay. Um all right good. Yeah,
if you want more information about this
technically on pages 276 278 I have a
simple rcoded version of Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo you can run it's not a lot
of code uh the part that's but I do the
custom derivatives here to get the
gradients for you for a custom model
when you work you will not do that you
do not have to do the calculus yourself
which is nice um because we have
probabilistic programming frameworks now
to do this for us and that's that's
what's nice and that's something that's
happened during my career so I know how
good it is for you. You've always
enjoyed that. Maybe you don't know, but
I remember programming markup chains
myself in graduate school. It was
terrible. Nobody should have to do that
again. No, I mean, if you're an expert
in this, you should program them once
and be like, "Okay, that's how it works.
That was nice. I'm never going to do
that again." Right? You cannot make your
a Markoff chain yourself that is better
than one of these math libraries. The
math libraries are open source projects
with professional programmers with tons
of bug testing. Your Markoff chain will
be busted. All right. And you do not do
it. Just there's still this kind of
cottage industry of people rolling their
own markoff chains. And I'm really
against this. There is just no chance
that their that their markoff chain is
more trustworthy uh than something from
one of these C++ libraries. Okay.
Hamilton Monte Carlo uses gradients. I
keep saying how do we get them? You can
write them yourself like the R code in
my book. Um but really what we use uh
are are math libraries that do something
called autodiff or automatic
differentiation. What this is is you
write in a computer language um the log
probability for your model uh this is
the likelihood function you think of it
but in in bay it's the log probability
also includes the priors um you just
write it in ordinary code uh you've
already done this using my package when
you write um those formulas in quap uh
you're writing the log probability of
the model and that's ex that's all quap
does is it takes that code and it it
uses each of those statements it
translates it into a probability
statement and then it just multiplies
them all. Well, actually it takes the
log of each and it adds them, right?
Because that's how we actually do math
in the computer. Um, so that's all you
need. What the autodiff library will do
is take that code and it knows the
derivative of every function in the
language. So it can return a symbolic
derivative for your code. I'll say that
again. The autoiff library knows the
analytical derivative first and second
usually of every function in the
programming language. And since every
statement of a log probability contains
those functions, all you need to
calculate the gradients of your code is
the chain rule. And maybe you haven't
done calculus in a while.
Congratulations, you're free. Uh but you
remember the chain rule if you ever did
remember the chain rule. You can take
it. Derivatives are great because you
can always do them. Well, I shouldn't
say you always do them. They're
non-analytical functions don't have
derivatives, but but for the most part,
like give you a function, you just apply
the chain rule, go to business, get a
derivative. Integrals are different,
right? You can get famous for solving
integrals still
but but the computer can can use the
chain rule and that's what these
autodiff libraries do. And this is this
kind of hidden motor in a lot of uh the
last 20 years of computational work.
It's driven a lot of the work in AI and
machine learning are these autodiff
libraries sometimes called back
propagation. Um I think I have yeah
return symbolic derivatives of your
model code. So if you've heard the
expression back propagation that's used
a lot in machine learning. I tend to
call it autodiff. It's the same idea.
You you write in a probabilistic
programming language. There's a library
that you outsource the derivatives to.
You get gradients. You can use better
sampling methods. That's the idea. And
this uh my package uses Stan. It's built
on top of Stan, which is a C++ um
autodiff library.
And uh it's named uh Stan was a person.
It's named after this fellow, the father
of the Monte Carlo method, uh,
Stanniswave Ulam, um, who wrote this
paper and again he he coined the term,
as far as I know, Monte Carlo for random
simulation. And he built mechanical
models for Monte Carlo numeric. Um,
he did a bunch of stuff in applied math
uh, along these lines. And so the the
Stan project is named after Stan.
[laughter] Yeah, it's not an acronym for
something, which I think is is is nice.
Um
uh okay, I'm going to pivot now to item
response theory and we're going to use
microchain Monte Carlo and then I can
teach you the diagnostics in an applied
case. But I should pause here and ask if
there are questions about the history or
the details of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
or anything first.
>> Yes.
>> Should [snorts] we be worried not only
about the high probability space enough
but the low probability space not
enough? A lot of your
were beautifully in the middle and I all
those poor edges.
>> Yeah. The question was when we're
sampling do we also need to worry about
the tails? Is that a fair summary? Um it
depends upon how much you care about the
tails. I'm going to come back to this
because we can we can construct
diagnostics for different parts of the
posterior distribution. If the thing
you're if you want to estimate if your
target estim is something about the the
extreme quantiles of a distribution then
you absolutely need to sample more and
think even sometimes think about
transformations uh to get that. So
there's that's so yes conditional on
your estimate you absolutely need to
worry about that. Absolutely. Um okay
uh the example I want to use here is uh
a real data set from something called
the judgment at Princeton. Um so this
was organized by a wine economist at the
uh conference the conference of wine
economists. It's a real thing I guess
quite a job. How do you get that job?
um uh to do a blind testing of New
Jersey wines versus famous French wines.
So Princeton's in New Jersey for some of
you who don't know. Uh and New Jersey is
not well known for its wines [laughter]
still. Um and so it was set up as an
interesting uh taste test. They had um
professional uh wine judges uh nine of
them. Uh we'll meet them later. No, I'm
not going to show the names, but the
names are in the data set. This data
set's in my package. Um, French and
American judges, wine experts. Uh, and
New Jersey wines have a long and not
star-studded history, but they still
make a lot of wine as I understand it.
Um, and the judgment at Princeton
happens in 2012. Um, and was much
reported on. I'm going to, you know,
give you a spoiler here because these
judges really couldn't tell the
difference between fine French wines and
New Jersey wines. If you know much about
wine though, this is not so surprising.
The the relationship between wine price
and wine quality is kind of flat, right?
It's just the thing about wine that's
interesting, I think. Um, and uh, so
yeah, we have 20 wines, 10 French wines,
10 New Jersey wines. This is a blind
testing. The only thing the judges knew
was whether it was red or white. You
can't blind them to that. Yeah, I guess
you could blindfold them, but that was
not part of the protocol. Um, nine
French and American judges. Each of the
judges scored each of the wines. I think
the protocol here is they do it within
flight. So they like compare all the
reds. Um, and if you've ever seen this
or ever done wine tastings, you're
constantly spitting out wine, right?
Because otherwise you'd be totally
sauced very quickly and your perception
of wine quality might go down. But um,
so they've got their spit cup and
they're sipping and spitting and sipping
and spitting and they compare all the
reds and they score them and then they
take a break and then they do all the
whites or something like that is the way
these things work. Um, so we've got
scores. The scores were between I think
zero and 20 uh was was the scale they
were given. We're going to work on a
standardized scale and I'm going to
treat it as Gaussian because the this
lesson is not about dealing with weird
outcome measures. So we're going to
focus on something else. Okay, let's you
knew there was going to be a DAG. So
here it is. Uh our outcome measure is
the score. This is what we've observed.
For each judge wine combination, there's
one score.
Uh so we have repeat measures on wines
and we have repeat measures on judges.
This situation um where the score is
produced by an interaction of the
quality of the item and a judge
preference is usually called item
response. And I'm going to expand this
category for you in a few slides, but
we'll just focus on wines for now. Um we
don't know the quality of the wine and
we don't know the judge's preferences.
The judges may vary in their
preferences. They're not identical
people. Um and the wines the whole
question is whether they vary in
quality. Uh so there's the score is not
immediately revealing of of which of
these things is driving it. Right? So
all the variation in scores and you need
to pull this apart and uh item response
theory is designed to do this for us.
And usually we're interested in things
that influence uh either the wine
quality or the judge preferences. Things
like the wine origin in this case,
right? So the wine origin may influence
the wine quality. New Jersey wines may
be better or worse than French wines
um depending upon the judge preferences.
Uh and there may be direct effects of
wine origin on score too if the judges
are not blinded. Right? This is what
blinding is about. So this DAG has no
blinding, right? That's why there's a
direct effect of X, right? Because if
the judges know it's a New Jersey wine,
they're like, "Ah, this is right?"
Sort of thing. uh but when they're
blinded, you know, it maybe it's
different. I've already told you it is
different, but uh there's also things
about the judges that we may be
interested in why the judges vary. Do
French judges and American judges
actually have different preferences,
right? Maybe it could have turned out,
it didn't, but it could have turned out
that um the French judges like the
French wines even when blinded and the
American judges like the New Jersey
wines even when blinded. But that isn't
what happened. Uh but it could have
been. Okay. So, yeah. Um, blinding is
the idea of getting rid of this direct
effect of uh features of the thing
that's being judged. Um, if there's
always questions about the effectiveness
of blinding in in studies like this, uh,
can be remarkably difficult to
effectively blind judges from things um
for for lots of reasons. For example, if
the grapes are different, they'll have a
different color in the glass. Yeah. And
you could you could tell the difference.
If you're a wine professional, you get
cues like that. But uh there are lots of
um discrimination studies uh with with
other causal structures where there are
questions about the ability to actually
blind judges uh to features of the say
job candidates and things of that kind.
It can be remarkably hard to do. Um
okay, what are we trying to do here?
This is an example of item response, an
item response model, often called IRT,
which stands for item response theory.
I'm not sure where the theory is here,
[laughter] but this is what it's called.
Um it's just a measurement model I think
but uh uh and the est demand in this
example is the association between wine
quality and its origin. We want to know
on average are the New Jersey wines
rated lower than the French wines. Um
and we're going to judge is not a
confound here, right? There's no
backdoor path through judge. Um, but
since there's variation in judges and
judge preferences might vary quite a
lot. If we can stratify by judge, we can
use the data set more effectively. We
can get tighter estimates of wine
quality is the idea. But there's not a
backdoor path. I want to make that
clear. Yeah, it's good to use judge
here, but this is not a a minimal
adjustment set sort of situation where
there's a a bias, but there's a lot of
there's a lot of asymatic noise
introduced by judge preferences. Now, if
the judges aren't blinded,
then you might have some other problems.
But um that's still not necessarily a
confound.
Okay, good. Does this make sense? I want
to I want to take this same DAG
structure and talk about other item
response models before moving on with
the analysis. So
um
uh this is the usual situation or rather
this is the original situation in which
item response theory was generated. It
was generated for grading students or uh
designing tests. uh actually it's a
theory for designing tests and uh
improving the items in them. The idea is
that the students have some um knowledge
which is unmeasured, right? We can't
directly assess how much students have
learned in a class. This is why we give
tests. Yeah. Is it or is it just
punishment? I forget. It's just
punishment. Uh so for some people it is.
But um
uh and the items here are the questions,
right? There are questions on the test.
And one question isn't enough. What a
terrible test that would be, right? If
you just sell students one question, the
question would be, did you learn the
material? Yes or no? They'd all say yes,
right? That's not a good test. Instead,
we have a bunch of items that some are
easy, some are difficult. And the job of
a good test is to measure broad
knowledge from the course and to
differentiate students, right? So, if
all the all the questions are easy, you
can't uh the best students can't
distinguish themselves. And if all the
questions are really hard, it's then you
can't then there's a bunch of
differences among students which will
just be smooshed by the difficulty of
the test. Yeah. So it's bad in both
directions if it's too hard or too easy.
Agreed? Yeah. Now this is test taking
theory. Uh
and so you can use these models uh to
analyze exam scores and find questions
which are bad, right? Which don't
discriminate among students. And you'll
see the relevance when we get into the
model. judges. The wine judges are like
questions on a test here. They have
biases. They have difficulties. Some
judges are really difficult. Takes a lot
to impress them with a wine. Other
judges are very discriminating across
wines. They can really tell them apart.
That's like a question that
differentiates students who've studied
and who haven't. Yeah. So, there's
different aspects of these preferences.
Yeah. Does this help? Does this metaphor
help? Okay. There also student features
here, but we don't need to talk about
those. Um, one more example. Sorry, the
Q migrates back again. Uh, students like
you are less interested in grades, I
hope. Um, I'm not really grading you in
this course, right? You're you're self-
motivated. Um, but you are interested in
money. So, you apply for grants and or
or you will be soon. And when you apply
for grants, uh, it has to be scored. It
goes to some funding agency. They have
hired reviewers. Hired is a strange
word. I don't think you I've been paid
like once to review grants. Uh usually
it's volunteer work. Um and these
reviewers are like wine judges and
they're judging your wine. Yes. And some
some they sometimes they even blind you.
Uh some granting agencies the the
proposals are blinded, right? So that
they don't know your name. That's very
difficult to do with scientific
proposals, which is why I talk about why
blinding is hard. Yeah. The citations
often give away who the proposal is
from. It's very very difficult to blind
a grant proposal from the reviewers. But
this is also an item response problem.
Especially in this case, it's really
critical because now there's a backdoor
path because usually only a few
reviewers are given each proposal. So
proposals are rated by different people.
It's not like the wine the judgment at
Princeton where there's nine judges and
they taste all the wines. So if there's
one judge, all the wines are
penalized by that But with
grant proposal review, it's not like
that. [snorts] Yeah, you could be the
unlucky one. Sorry, this is too early in
the morning to talk about this, but this
is the reality. So, I think these
situations on grant review panels are
really critical for thinking about um
dealing with averaging out reviewer
preferences and how difficult reviewers
are with grant proposals. It's almost
never done, though. It's almost never
done having served on panels before, but
that's that's another conversation.
Okay, back to wine.
Um,
so, uh, here we we have wine. We're
thinking about wine quality and the
judges. We're gonna, as always in these
examples, I'm going to build up the
model incrementally. Um, the the item
response model will grow feature by
feature. We're just going to start out
with the most naive model. We're just
going to estimate a mean for each wine,
ignoring judges.
Okay? And that's what this model is.
It's just a normal uh ordinary linear
regression. S subi is the standardized
um score. Uh so I take the raw scores
and I just make them a variable with
mean zero and standard deviation one.
Uh then we have a parameter capital q
for each wine and I give them normal 01
prior and it's just a linear regression.
Okay, nothing fancy yet. Um uh I'm
running all this in markup chain Monte
Carlo so we can talk about diagnostics.
I'm going to build this up and we're
gonna talk about diagnostics for a bit
then I'm going to add more features to
the model and we'll talk about
diagnostics again. Okay. So when you um
I should say here if you're using my
package uh the only thing you have to
change about the way you write these
models is to type ulam instead of quap
ulam is stan stanisu
ulam that's the that's what it is. So I
named it after him. And what this does
is that it it Ulam takes that um model
formula and it translates it in the
stand codes the autodiff library uh
samples from it and returns the samples
to you. Okay. Um and so when you use
prey to get a summary with this it works
just like your quap models but now you
get diagnostics in the last three
columns of the prey table. And I want to
talk about these a bit. There's r hat
and then there's two things which are
called ess. And this relates to your
question about tails because I have
added the the ESS bulk and ESS tail. Um
so in the in the context of the workflow
this is the step that comes after you've
designed your model you've gotten the
estimates which are the posterior
distribution in this case the raw
estimates but now before we move on and
do stuff with them we want to make sure
that the sampling was good. Yeah because
sometimes it won't be in the old days
this was extremely critical because
Metropolis is garbage. No, I mean it was
great at the time. It was the best we
had, but it's very inefficient. Um,
Hamiltonian is much more reliable and
the algorithms get better all the time.
Uh, so much so that I used to have a
bunch of examples in the lecture of
models that would sample poorly and now
they sample fine and I have to come up
with new broken models just to give you
examples of badly sampling models. It's
very frustrating but also great. Yeah,
because the algorithms are getting
better. U but anyway, you still need
diagnostics. These this is just basic
due diligence to say yes we took all
these samples and we um use some
diagnostics to verify that the chains
are sampling from the intended
distribution. This is not always done.
Um I'm a methods person. I read a lot of
methods journals. I see custom markoff
chain Monte Carlo applications and
biostats all the time where there are no
diagnostics.
It's custom software written in Rust.
Great. I like Rust. Whatever. No
diagnostics. Do I believe those chains?
No. I need diagnostics. Yeah, there's a
bunch of population genetic software
like this that just no chain diagnostics
at all. And I'm not sure what to do with
those papers. Yeah, just so maybe they
computed the diagnostics and they just
didn't report them, but it would be
really nice to know what's going on. In
one case, the software really just
doesn't produce diagnostics at all. I
wrote to the authors. So, do not be
that, right? There's a certain amount of
just basic quality assurance in this
business. Um and luckily it's easy to do
because you can also call libraries to
compute these diagnostics. Yeah, you
don't have to write them yourself. Um
and there's a range of them. I just want
to talk about the most common ones.
There are trace plots. This thing called
R hat. Uh it's a convergence diagnostic.
Um uh this thing called effective sample
size. I think the population geneticists
in the audience will you can think about
this like effective population size.
It's this fictional thing. You can't
estimate what you want but you can
estimate this thing which is some mlange
of the things you want which actually
turns out to be diagnostically really
useful and then there are things like
divergences and energy which are
specific to Hamiltonian Monte Carlo but
which are extra diagnostics and so
that's good you get more diagnostics
from from these more modern methods um
trace plots you've probably seen before
sometimes called fuzzy caterpillar
plots. Yeah. Uh these are good chains.
Um I'm going to zoom in. So this is each
of these is a wine. It's its estimated
quality parameter. Um on the left shaded
in gray are the warm-up steps. Um and on
the right are the samples. So all the
posterior inferences are coming from the
samples on the right hand side. You can
adjust the length of these things. The
default is half and half. Warmup is when
Stan is figuring out the step length and
and things like that. So it's tuning the
efficiency of the algorithm. Okay. it's
not sampling from the posterior uh
during that period. So you don't end up
using those samples. Uh usually by
default you get way more warm-up than
you need. I I say this with some
caution. I don't want to encourage you
to make the warm-up really small because
then the sampling will be less
efficient. But uh usually you don't need
as much warm-up as we get by default.
But defaults are there to be risk
avoidant, right? So that's the way
they're like that. As you get more pro
with this, feel free to adjust the
amount of warm-up. um
uh to really assess. So, so these are
good chains. Uh they're stable. They're
sampling from the same area. Um that's
what you that doesn't mean they're
right, but that's kind of a minimal uh
visual standard. This is kind of a a
casual visual assessment. There are
things we can calculate about the chains
though uh that that give us a better
idea because there's lots of chains to
inspect. Um, even this model has more
than fit on one screen and it's routine
these days to fit models with thousands
of parameters. You're not going to look
at every one of them and say, "Yeah,
that looks good. That looks good." This
is not what we do. Instead, we calculate
statistics based upon all the chains uh
for every parameter and we we actually
really need to run more than one chain
uh because different chains can converge
to different places. So, you want to
ensure that they all go to the same
place.
>> Yeah. Question.
about those formats. Uh like we also
have like a diagnostic plot for the
convergence. So we can see the parameter
when it gets stable uh at which like
sample size why don't we just uh
look at that and then say okay uh this
is right the same. So this burning then
will just discard
>> and take the rest when it's stable. Why
is it always like How some just some
random number basically.
>> You mean the amount of warm-up or
>> Yeah. So um well it's in stan it's not
just a random number. There are
different phases. There are three
distinct phases for warm-up where it's
adapting different parameters of the
algorithm and it's not burn-in. So
Metropolis has metropolis and Gibbs have
burn-in. Burnin is samples from the
posterior. Uh warm-up is not. warm-up is
a set of experiments that uh have that
they're that the uh math library is
doing to tune the step size and other
things of the distribution. So you just
can't use the warm-up in this case. Um
but you could have less, you can have
more uh and then it'll tune more it'll
optimize the chain better. But it's
obviously a trade-off because if you
start sampling earlier then you get the
samples earlier even if they're less
efficient. Yeah. Um I don't know if I
answered your question exactly but
>> still
>> not with Hamiltonian Monte Carlo because
warm-up is not burnin
and um also the fact that the the mean
has stabilized doesn't mean it's the
right mean
you know so you can have a I mean there
will unless the variance is really big
there will always be a mean right so
unless it's a Koshy distribution or
something like that there will always be
a mean so it's Not the fact that there's
a mean doesn't tell you it's working. Um
the the fact that in these fuzzy
caterpillars that it's tightly in the
same place and there's not much
autocorrelation is a much better
indication that it's exploring the right
space. Um because it could if even if it
wandered really slow, there would still
be a mean that it would eventually
converge on. But we can do better. Okay,
we're going to run more chains. So at
the bottom of the ulam, you can specify
any number of chains. And probably all
of you have computers now that have at
least eight cores in them, right?
Because isn't everything like this now?
Eight or 16 cores? I think I think this
laptop I'm lecturing with has 32 cores,
which is absurd. What am I going to do
with that? I'm gonna run Markoff chains,
right? [laughter]
Um, no, we have a computing cluster,
too. My apartment, we we run chains on
that is what we do. Um, you need more
than one chain because you want to see
that the chains go to the same place.
And we're going to use variance within
chains and variance between chains to
compute something called R hat, which
I'm going to talk about in a moment.
Does this make some sense though just
intuitively right now and why we care
about this? The visual assessment of
trace plots is absolutely worth doing
but it's not sufficient. Yeah, when we
do multiple chains they all get stacked
on one another like this which is one of
the reasons I'm not a big fan of trace
plots. There could be one bad chain in
here and you'll never see it. It's a
it's a big problem with the fuzzy
caterpillar. Yeah. Um
and what should a bad chain look like?
Well, I I it took me a while to rig a
bad chain, but here's one. Um here are
two chains that really are not exploring
in the same place. Yeah. And you'll see
them wandering like this. And and the
ESS is also small, which I'll talk about
in a moment. Um there's another kind of
visual assessment plot that I like, and
I think I'm the only person on the
planet that likes these, but they're in
my book, and I talk about them, and my
package computes them. They're called
trace rank plots. they don't have this
overlapping problem of the fuzzy
caterpillar. Uh you rank all the samples
from the posterior distribution and then
you're plotting the ranks uh across time
and so each color is a chain and they
switch positions and jug up and down
which means the chains are exploring the
same spaces. There isn't one chain
that's always above or below the others,
right? So that's what the ranking helps
so that there's no overlapping is what
we do. Um, this this rank ordering is
also how how we compute ESS, the the
bulk ESS. Um, and if you get a bunch of
them, they look like this. Aren't these
pretty?
Yeah, they're much prettier. Um,
okay. These are not yet popular, and
maybe they never will be, but uh the
they're they're my default because
they're more diagnostic than trace
plots. Okay, let's talk about R hat. We
take the chains and we're going to use
the variance within each chain from
start to end.
um and the variance between chains uh to
understand to get a diagnostic that the
chains are exploring are stable and
exploring the same stable distribution.
Um the basic idea here R hat is like an
F-stistic again for the population
geneticists right FST it's a ratio of
variances um so uh uh as the total
variance shrinks um to the average
variance within chains R hat approaches
one it's just a ratio of the variance
within in between it's like FST again
for the population geneticists in the
audience so if the if the if the chains
were exploring different places then the
variance between them would not shrink
to the variance within. I'll say that
again. If the chains are exploring
different distributions, the variance
between chains is not going to shrink to
the variance within chains. But if those
become the same in the limit, then
they're exploring the same target
distribution. At least they might be.
Yeah. If it doesn't shrink, they're
definitely not. Yeah.
So, R hat should go to one because
that's when the ratio is the same. Does
that make sense? And here's this graph
is a very simple simulation of what
happens across samples. You can compute
this from your own chains, right? You
just need to order the samples and then
the variances are going to equilibrate
over time. Um, our hat has been around
for a long time. It was Andrew Gellman
came up with the idea last century. I'm
sure he'll appreciate me expressing it
that way. Um, but I think he was a
graduate student when he came up with
the idea. And this just took over Marco
Monte Carlo because finally there was a
principal diagnostic. It was easy to
compute. You could quote it. um you
could work on comparing different
sampling algorithms with it. Uh it's
it's everywhere now and everything uses
it. Um but the version we use now that
that um that my package reports as the R
hat column there is not the original
one. It's a new one that uses ranks and
does variance within between and does a
bunch. It's like version four I think of
R hat. So you just want to be careful
what algorithm you're using. Uh it's
nice to use the most recent one. Aki
Veter um did the most to develop this
most uh modern version of our hat
because he came up with posture
distributions which would look fine
given previous definitions of our hat
but we're actually busted. He's very
good at this. He's a very creative uh uh
applied statistician. Um so you should
think that the new R hat is the uh
Gellman vetery our hat I think is the be
the way to think about it. Um does our
hat make some sense? Yeah. I mean, we're
going to see it in in action a bit. The
other one that always gets reported is
effective sample size or ESS. Um, which
is kind of answering the question, how
long would the chain be if each sample
were independent, right? So, you can
imagine just taking random independent
samples from a distribution. Say like
using Rorm and R, right? If you just
call r norm a thousand times you get a
thousand independent you hope samples
you will a thousand independent samples
from a normal distribution your markoff
chain typically has some autocorrelation
that is subsequent samples are not
independent of one another because it's
exploring the space sequentially in
trajectories right so metropolis is
really bad about this it has really high
autocorrelation because you're taking
local proposals and samples so you're
not the parameter value doesn't change
very soon this doesn't inval validate
the chain. You can have correlated to
samples and still sample from the
distribution. Um but the lower the
autocorrelation, the more efficient
you're ex exploring the target
distribution.
Um so effective sample size uh the exact
formula is a little bit more complicated
but you can think of it as being the
ratio of the number of samples you took
over a measure of the autocorrelation.
So when the autocorrelation is is high
then you have effectively fewer samples
because the sequential samples are
redundant in their information. Does
that make sense?
Uh you can also have negative
autocorrelation and you often do and
then that's better right? Then you can
actually have have effectively more
samples than you took because the
because the sequential samples are are
negatively autocorrelated with one
another. And this happens a lot in Stan
actually. It's so good at sampling that
it avoids looping back that it goes from
one side of the distribution to the
other and there's negative
autocorrelation between sequential
samples and then you'll get an ESS which
is larger than the number of samples you
took. It's not a mistake.
The faces in the audience are great.
Yeah.
Uh this was ESS was developed though for
the usual situation which is going to be
your life where for the parameters of
interest there's positive
autocorrelation over over short lags at
least and this reduces the effective
sample size. Um there's two things that
get returned by default here in in this
package. One is ESS bulk which is a
robust central measure of the effective
sample size for the the central
quantiles of the posterior distribution
for each parameter. It's usually what
we're interested in if we're trying to
estimate an expectation, for example.
That's what we want. And then there's
this tail measure and the ESS tail. In
this case, um I say a lot more about
this. I did a I did a about 15 minutes
for the other section on ESS tail and
it's it's in lecture B3, like the start
of it. So that's online if you want to
watch that, the first 15 minutes of
lecture B3. Tons about ESS tail. Um, all
I want to say here is that's a measure
of the effective sample size in the
tails, right? The the lower 2.5 and the
upper 2.5, I think, is what it is. And
um, and often that can be lower, a lot
lower. And that's not that's fine.
That's to be expected. It's hard to
sample from tails. But if you really
care about the extreme quantiles for
some applied reason, then you're just
going to have to sample more. Okay.
Um, all right.
uh I like to do and this is just me when
I'm doing my first diagnosis of a model
is plot the effective sample size of
each parameter against its R hat. And so
this is these kinds of two-dimensional
diagrams. There's a function an
undocumented function in the rethinking
package called dashboard which will make
these for you. I use it all the time. Um
why is it undocumented? Well then I'd
have to think hard about exactly how to
justify what to do with it, right? But
for you, I share it with you. And uh but
you get this plot. You get some other
stuff too. Um but you get this plot and
uh on the left is the kind of thing
you're looking for. Each point is a
parameter and effective sample size for
bulk is shown on the bottom. Um there
were 2,000 samples drawn here. That's
what that vertical black line is. And
you'll see a lot of parameters are above
it. This is because of the negative
autocorrelation. Stan is so good at
sampling that the sequential samples are
negatively autocorrelated. So the
effective sample size is bigger than the
raw number of samples you took, which is
2,00 in this example. And then there's
that one lonely parameter on the left of
2,00. That's sigma. It's nearly always
sigma. It's harder to sample scale
parameters. Um, and then the R hat. And
you'll see that they're they're all
really low towards one. And that's what
you want to see.
What will happen to you? Oh yes, it will
because it happens to everybody. Is a
situation on the right where um uh you
get a bunch of parameters that have low
effective sample size and high R hats
and then you have to try to debug this
and figure out what went wrong. Often
you just there's a typo. Yeah. So don't
be afraid. This will happen to you. But
this is why we do diagnostics. Okay. Um
and and uh this these plots from the
dashboard that red line is just a
heristic. That's 10% of your total
sample. So I took 2,000 samples here. So
200 is 10%. Um and uh that's just a
heristic guide for danger zone. The left
is the danger zone. Yeah. But there's no
magic number uh of effective sample
size. That's enough. Um it's just if
it's less than 10% the the ESS is an
approximation. So and it if if there's a
lot of autocorrelation, it's a bad
approximation. So if you're on the left
of that red line, the ESS values aren't
even reliable. So you really want to fix
it. Okay, but if you were thinking like
if you want to estimate the mean of a
normal distribution, you only need like
20 samples, right? So don't freak out
about ESS. It's it's all of the central
limit theorem still applies here. Yeah.
Question.
>> Why do people tell me 300? Have you also
heard 300
>> for what?
>> ForSow
300.
>> I haven't heard that.
>> I heard that.
>> I don't know where that comes from.
I've been driven mad.
>> Yeah, you should be driven mad. Uh I
mean obviously it depends upon how many
samples you drew. Yeah. So it can't be
that can't be what it is, right?
>> It's like that number 30.
>> Yeah. Yeah. It's like that number 30
>> observation,
>> right? Because if I took a million
samples and my ESS was 300, that's
obviously not a valid chain, right? So
people use MCMCGLM all the time and
report chains like that, unfortunately.
Right? So that's that's sorry I pick on
that particular package, but it's got a
a fairly clumsy Gib sampler in it that
people will run for like two million
samples and then thin it and they'll
have an ESS of 30. Like it's just not a
valid chain. So it's got to be a
proportion that you're worried about.
>> Yeah,
>> you're absolutely right.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Okay. I've got two
minutes and I want to finish this. I'm
sorry. I might go a little bit over. I
apologize, but I'm gonna tell you the
the punchline about the wines. Okay. So
now let's add origin uh on this. I'm
just going to add in the wine's origin.
A vector, two parameters called O, and
they're indexed by X, which is the
wine's origin. And again, we're just in
linear regression land. We're still not
doing item response theory. That comes
next. Um, just to show you there's real
reliable difference between the origins
here. Uh, New Jersey wines, French wines
get there's a lot of variation in the
wines. Well, basically there's one
that's clearly worse than all the others
and the others that they're basically
the same. Um,
uh, poor poor wine number 18, which is a
New Jersey red. [laughter]
I can look up which one if you want to
avoid it, but um, that one's clearly
worse than the others, but there's no
clear average difference between New
Jersey wines and French wines, which was
our mission. Now, item response theory.
We want to bring judges into this
because there's a lot of noise in the
wine judgments which would be because of
the variation in judges and we the idea
is we get more efficiency when we adjust
for judges and when we do that item
response theory we actually add multiple
parameters per judge two in this case um
and the reason is because judges like
test items can vary both in their
difficulty and their discrimination as I
call it here harshness some judges are
harsh they don't like anything yeah some
judges are easy they love everything.
Every wine's a winner, right? Think
about your friends at restaurants,
right? You've got that friend who hates
everything and really hard to please,
and you've got your friend that just
loves French fries. Yeah, it's just uh
so those are fair, those are
preferences, and we shouldn't debate
preferences, but those things generate
extra noise in judgments. Discrimination
is how much the judge differentiates
between low and high quality things.
Regardless of their overall harshness,
are they going to rate a really bad
thing and a really good thing?
across the preferences of other
individuals as having different scores.
Right? I'm going to show you a graph
about this in in a couple slides. Um so
now our prediction equation has has this
form. We've got the wine quality and
we've got its origin. We subtract from
this the judge's harshness. This
relocates where the mean is. So if a
judge is really harsh, they have a high
harshness parameter. It that cancels out
the wine's quality. You can think of it
as a measure of how good the wine has to
be to get an average score. That's
literally the definition of the of the
judge's harshness. If the judge's
harshness is two, they will rate as
average a wine with quality two.
Does that make sense? Yeah. Um and then
we multiply all of this. This is where
this doesn't look like a linear
regression anymore. Everything gets
interacted with the judge's
discrimination because the
discrimination is how much differences
matter to the ratings they give. So if
discrimination is zero, obviously this
whole equation is zero and the judge
rates everything the same regardless of
differences in the wines.
You hope that doesn't happen. Yeah. But
there are test questions like this that
just don't discriminate among students.
Effectively, this is like guessing,
right? Uh a question that everybody can
guess. If discrimination is a large
positive number, then the differences
inside the parentheses make a big
difference in the ratings that are
given. This is like does the you could
think of discrimination as does the
judge use the whole range of scores,
right? Or do they just use like two or
three points to rate everything and that
matters as well. So all right, I'm aware
of time. I'm going to finish this for
you. So we can fit this model. The thing
I want to point out to you here is this
is one of the advantages of markup chain
Monte Carlo. We can use arbitrary
constraints. Now any distribution we're
like we're not stuck in normal land
because we're not making any normal
approximations for the discrimination
prior. We do not want a normal
distribution.
Why? Because it needs to be positive.
Yeah, discrimination is positive. If you
take this model and you make
discrimination, let it be negative, uh
the model will go crazy because it's got
no way to know what better is on the
wine quality area. By making the
discrimination parameters positive, you
set the directionality of the Q
parameters, what a good wine is and what
a bad wine is. If you don't do that, the
chains are just going to flip between
negative and positive constantly and
you'll get a r hat of like 20.
Yeah. So you need to constrain the at
least uh the discrimination parameters.
You don't have to use an exponential.
That's just the simplest positive
distribution to use as an example. Okay,
does that make sense? This is easy to do
with marker chain Monte Carlo. With a
quadratic approximation, this is going
to be uh bad because it'll happily tell
you there's probability mass below zero
because it's going to do a normal
approximation of something that is that
is strictly positive. Um this is what it
looks like when you don't um constrain
the discrimination parameters to be
positive. You get lab what's called
label switching. Uh and the chains look
like this because it's just flipping
between the signs of all the Q and D
parameters, right? because they get
multiplied. If the D's are positive, um
you can flip them to negative and then
you just have to make all the other
parameters flip all their signs and you
get the same predictions. And so that's
what does that make sense? I know it's a
lot to say, but back in this equation,
right? If D is positive and then we make
it negative, we just have to flip the
signs on all the other parameters and
we'll get exactly the same prediction.
Yeah. So that's what that's what these
chains are doing. They're having a fun
time doing it. Yeah. We do not want
this. We want this. So, make your
discrimination parameters positive. And
that's how it works. Um, I'm going to
finish this. I'm sorry. I'm over four
minutes. Um, here the the estimates. I'm
not going to focus on this this forest
plot too much to show you. We have
harshness and discrimination parameters.
Now, at the bottom, one harshness for
each judge. You'll see the harshnesses
vary a lot. Some judges are really
picky. Uh, some some not so much. And
then we have discrimination parameters.
uh and and the judge is very indiscrim
excuse me discrimination as well. It's
easier to appreciate these things
together because together they define
the the the posterior function that that
represents the judges preferences. So
here are the posterior mean functions
for each judge and I've drawn American
judges in black and French judges in
red. Um and uh uh so on the horizontal
axis we have the latent wine quality for
imagine a wine that so zero means
average. Yeah. Uh two is two standard
deviations up minus two is two standard
deviations down. So that's the wine
universe. Uh and then on the vertical we
have the expected score the judge will
assign on average. Obviously there's
variance around these lines and you'll
see that discrimination is when the
slope is positive. That's positive
discrimination. And the steeper the
slope, the more discriminating the judge
is. So there's that one American judge
who's very discriminating. And that's
actually the guy who organized this
tasting competition.
He's a wine economist. He's very
discriminating. Used to have a blog. His
name is Dr. Veno on the blog. Um he's
very good at discriminating wines. Um we
want to draw, we're basian, so we want
to draw from the posterior distribution
though. So here's the same thing
represented with uh one graph for each
judge, 20 samples from the posterior
show you there's some uncertainty in
their preference functions and uh and I'
I've drawn dash lines at the zero point.
So you can compare these more easily and
see some judges are harsher than others.
If they're consistently below the
horizontal dash line, they're a harsh
judge. They're consistently above it,
they're an anti-harsh judge, a nice
judge, something like that. And then the
steepness is discrimination. And you see
judge two there again, the wine
economist,
very discriminating compared to some of
the others. Um, okay. Um, I'm going to
finish this up. I'm very sorry for going
six minutes over. Um, so yeah, the punch
line here is there's no evidence in this
sample that New Jersey wines are are
really worse than um than French wines.
This is the posterior distribution of
the contrast between the two origins.
Uh, about a third of it is above zero,
two-thirds is below it. Yeah. So maybe
they're a little worse, but that's
dominated by that one New Jersey red.
Basically, if we threw that one out, it
would be different. And nobody knows the
Sopranos anymore. So I don't know why I
even put Tony Soprano on this slide.
Does anybody No, nobody has who any idea
who this is. No.
Um, okay. This is my last slide. Sorry.
So um Desktop MCMMC really has been a
revolution in in applied statistics uh
in the sciences and in industry because
it lets you express your scientific
ideas directly in writing log
probability models and then the computer
does the rest. It's really been amazing
and people like David Spiegel alter here
represented in his natural costume uh
were really integral in starting
projects in the 1980s to do this to to
create software which automatically
generated Markoff chains for scientists
working in research uh the the bugs
project is there's a lot of credit for
starting that cultural movement um and
working on it now now no one uses bugs
because it's a fragile mess but no I
don't think it's supported anymore right
but um from there there were things like
Jags
And now we have these probabilistic
programming languages based on autodiff
like Stan and PMC and touring and Julia
Jax. Uh there's a bunch of them and
they're all based on the same model. Uh
and it allows you to express models. So
uh next week we'll continue with things
that need MCMC, but the stat model
formulas are going to look the same.
Okay, thanks for your attention. I
apologize for stealing eight minutes
from your day.